Mr. C.A. Bonin, side two. We were talking about the
school board. And in 1944, you became on the school
board. What facilities did you have at that time?
There's some wooden buildings.
They're all gone now. They're over here where the
present school and where the city.
That was the one that fronts on Jersey. The city
owns that now. But the school owns the building
back of it. So in 1944, there were only wooden
shacks in that area?
Or wooden buildings, I'm sorry. After 1940, those
wooden buildings were built. See, that's when we
were ordered off the campus. Right. And
I think all those buildings are gone now except the
old gymnasium.
In 49, do you remember that the school district
decided to build a more permanent building? It's
the one that the city owns now. It's the one that is
the community center now? Yeah. Can you tell me a
little bit about how you and the superintendent
went about deciding on how to build this building?
We visited a lot of campuses, high school
campuses.
And
I imagine this, which is now the city building, was
built according to the ideas that he and I picked up
around these different campuses. What we liked,
what we didn't like, and what we could afford and
all that sort of thing. this building and
the Lincoln School were both built out of a bond
issue of a little over, I think it was $110,000 that
we had to work with. The school board's bond
election? It was the school board? Yeah. Or was it
the city? No, the school board. Was it at this time
that you had to double the tax rate on the property
in order to get enough money? No, that was when we
ordered off the campus. That was Bill Sparks and I.
We were the main ones and
we were active when the rest of the school board was
left it up to us to do the work. But in 49, when you
built the school that is presently the community
center, you had a $110,000 bond? Yeah, a little
over $100,000, if I remember. To provide for? Both
schools, one down in Lincoln and here. Lincoln was
the Negro facility? Why were they separate? We
just grew up that way. It had always been that way?
Always been that way.
before the integration of the black schools and
the white schools. Where were other facilities?
Do you remember other negro facilities before
Lincoln School was built?
Well,
I remember there was a school there for the
negroes.
But it was kind of ramshackle. Where was that
located? Right where they,
approximately where the Lincoln School is now.
Oh, okay. So they had an area where Lincoln is, and
in 1949 they built Lincoln School also. Yeah. Do
you remember when the schools were integrated
here in College Station? No, but I'm in and you can
find out. It
wasn't too long ago, you know. It wasn't too long
ago? No. I think you can find that over at the city.
Did some of College Station students go to Bryan,
to the Bryan School District? A few did, not many.
How would you compare the two districts? That's
hard to do. They were an old, well-organized
school district. We were young.
No money to spend on school, but we had good
teachers. And that's mostly what a school's made
of, the teachers
and the people that build the schools and so on.
We were a pretty select group out here, mostly
faculty members on the campus.
Mr. Gabbard and George Wilcox and I are all on the
A&M faculty and had some idea of what the school
would be like and all that sort
of thing. In a place as old as Bryan, you get all
kinds of actions to deal with, you know. The
Mexicans and the Negroes and the whites all have a
little different interest in the school. Out
here, it is pretty much our school. Pretty much
homogenous. I had read about, and I need some
clarification if you know this incident, where
the Bryan School District encouraged somebody to
become the superintendent of a college station?
Yeah. With the purpose of weakening?
He admitted later that he was sent out here to take
over or bring our school into Brian. Do you
remember who that was? I can't think of his name. It
was Bunning. His name was Bunning. Bunning?
Bunning. And he later was county superintendent.
Do you remember what years that was?
Well, I was on the school board.
We got off the campus in 1940.
When
I
went on the school board,
all the rest of the directors were Baptists.
a fellow by the name of Breeland, Jim Breeland,
went to Mississippi, I think,
from here.
They were, that group were pretty much in charge of
the school at that time. And you can imagine the
position I
was in. vote as one man.
And you had the dissenting vote most of the time.
Dissenting vote, yeah. A little later.
took control of the school, but it was pretty tough
going for a while.
Were their decisions arbitrary in any way? Oh,
they just voted together.
One would vote and then the rest of them would vote.
The same way?
Do you know what period that was, what time, what
years?
Well, I went on the school ward in 1944. Four
or
five years after that.
I didn't have much to say. How many members made up
the school board? How many people were on the
school board?
I think it was seven. Seven? I think
it was five or seven.
Did Mr. Bunting do any damage to the school system
when he did?
He
made a statement. There was only one good boy in 40,
so the school
the boys in the school immediately organized us as
the 40
boys that he had in mind. And
of course, he said what he wanted. He
delighted in dissension and all that sort of
thing. dissension within the school? Yeah. It was
a pretty rough time. How long was he
superintendent? About four years, I think.
Something like that. Then he became county
superintendent. But he wasn't able to... No. As
soon as they got rid of him,
the school fell into Who was the next
superintendent after Bunting?
Well, it came from out in Central Texas and was
superintendent for about three or four years.
down in the north edge of the Edwards Plateau near
San Angelo.
He was a very, very nice gentleman.
Our school began to grow about that time.
Didn't have somebody in the school system
fighting to bring it into Bryan.
Did Mr. Bunting make an active attempt to bring the
school district into Bryan?
We never knew what he was doing.
We knew what he said. which indicated that is what
he was working for. Do you remember the years that
this happened?
It
was in the 40s, early 40s. Okay. I can't give you the
exact year. That's fine. Just an approximate date
is fine.
Is there anything else you'd like to add about the
school system? Basically, you're my best source
as far as the school system is concerned that I
haven't asked you about that might be important.
A year or two ago, I could have helped you a great
deal.
What you've told me so far has been a lot of help.
Well, I hope so.
Your questions have helped me. Help you remember?
Yeah, put your finger on things.
If you don't remember anything anymore about
the school, I'd like to talk about the lawsuit that
was brought against the city concerning the
legality of serving both the city and the state. Do
you remember that? Yes.
I served three years on the city council during
that time. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Anderson,
not Frank Anderson, but DA Anderson,
traveled all over the state
and got
that law,
got them to do away with that law, which committed
He attacked on the school system. It also attacked
the school system? Oh, that's right. You couldn't
serve on the school board. Yeah. And that's right.
Do you remember who brought the suit against the
city? Boyant, wasn't it? Yeah, Boyant. Why do you
think he... Well, Boyant's...
They owned a lot of land around here, and whenever
the school had to buy more land, they had to buy it
from the boys. Is that right, Alice? Yeah, and I
don't know why, but they seemed to have got across
roads with the city and the school, it seemed like.
Well, they owned all that land north of the campus.
They
had problems with the taxes. With the tax? The
taxes. Did they not want to pay? They were pretty
bad about paying the taxes. I see. But you don't
recall why he would bring it against the city, the
suit?
He was, when Mr. D.A. Anderson was mayor, he gave
him an awful lot of trouble. And I can't remember
why that was. But I know that he gave him a lot of
trouble. I know they had a city meeting.
Interesting people. Encouraged people to come.
sort of counteract the Boyd effect. Was there
someone of Boyd's on the city council around that
time? There was one on the... I think there was.
They kept them down on everything they wanted to
do. Mr. Anderson was so interested in getting
these lands for the parks at that time. He's the one
that really pushed... ahead of time for us to have
parkland around here. And they were kind of
holding back on these things. I see. They weren't
interested in... No, no, they just weren't
aggressive. I don't think they could see that the
city was going to grow that much. And they just
didn't seem to see those things. I know he asked a
group of us over there one Sunday, and I think he had
other groups of interested citizens to talk to us
about it. to see if we could get behind him on it
because he was having such a hard time with these
people. And then there was one man that really
wasn't too well educated himself that was always
on the council back then. I can't think of his name
now. They had the districts different then.
people that area for over there near where the city
hall used to be over near the boy at land and and that
man was always on there too and the boy had him under
their finger you don't remember his name though i
ought to be able to let her sit there okay
whenever you think of it. If I do. Well, how did this
lawsuit affect the city? How did it affect the
government of the city? Well, it affected the
government of all cities. And that's what Dee
Anderson traveled all over the state to interest
other cities in our problem. And they repealed it.
your college within the city, because the greater
number of people that would be interested in being
on the council are employed by the state. And they
could not hold a council position if they were
employed by the state, even if they didn't pay the
council, which they don't here at College
Station. But you see, they
supposedly couldn't collect the salary. But it
even held true if you weren't getting a salary at
the same. I know they had that same problem. Down
there at Angleton, they have a son that's a lawyer
down there, and he's a city lawyer. And they had two
men that they had had on the city council. Maybe one
of them was on the school board. I don't know. But
they had been paid, I think, around $100 a month.
And it caused a real problem because They said they
had to pay back the money they collected. Isn't
that awful? Is there a college in England? No, but
these were school teachers. Oh, on the school
board. Yeah, and they were school teachers, some
of these people that were on the council. So they
were serving Texas. So they were serving Texas.
They were paid by Texas at these schools. And the
council. Oh, I see. See, they were getting state
money. So it would affect a lot of cities. Yes, and
especially here back then in the times when Daddy
was on there, they were all people from the
university, and we didn't have many people out
here that worked with the university. And so every
one of the people on the council were, I guess every
one of them was at that time, no, Don Dale, is he on
there now? But most of them were employed by the
university. My husband was 75 years old when they
pushed him up. Oh, I didn't realize that. And Dr.
Lindsey, he was 72. Both of them replaced two men
that were employed by the university. And what's
his name again? Fred Anderson. Fred Bryson. Is he
still alive? No. No. No, he isn't alive. No, there
are too many of those people that would have been
good ones for you to talk to are gone now. That's too
bad. This is our next-door neighbor. My husband
was on the first city council. It would have been
wonderful to talk to Mr. Gabbard. We've talked
about him. Well, do you feel like the issue was
valid at all? It was a state law, but they got it
taken off. It was him? That's what D.A. Anderson
traveled all over the state to. To get people to
vote it off. Were these people... Oh, I see. Oh, it
was in a constitutional amendment and people
voted? Yes, they tried and then they had a chance to
vote it off. And he encouraged... Well, that was
wonderful. He really... He did it almost
single-handed, I think. He traveled all over.
He's done a lot of good things for the city. Do you
know why he never... I know he had resigned during
that period. Do you know why he never ran again for
mayor after that? When he could? When he could. So,
when you...
Can you tell me about your becoming a councilman?
It was something that you were asked to do, is that
right? Andy Anderson asked him to run. And at that
time, he wasn't getting off right away. And right
after
there to back him up with someone that knew about
everything, Mr. Anderson. But he found he had to
get off, too. So when these men were resigning from
the council, Mr. Anderson asked you to run in a
special election? Is that right? Yeah. And right
after that, he had to resign then, too. Yes, I
remember that. He did resign, yeah. He hadn't at
the time.
I don't remember why that was. Well, we know he
resigned. Yeah, he resigned shortly after that.
Really, before you were elected, though. Yeah.
That was it. He did all he could before he had to get
off. Except my husband so much that he had a mild
stroke. Oh, is that right? Yeah, just...
Yeah, it was in 71, wasn't it? Yes. Yes, it was. Then
who became mayor after Mr. Anderson was signed?
Oh,
Dick Hervey. Yeah, Hervey. Dick Hervey. You know
him, don't you? I don't know if he was connected
with the bank. I don't know if he is anymore.
How did the council meetings operate when you were
on the council? How did they operate? What were
they like?
Did citizens attend? There were always some
there.
Were there...
Breland was involved in the school, wasn't he?
Yes, that was long before that time. That was when
you were at school then. Yes, I was about 75 years
old. Yeah, when you went on to college.
Were there, was the council pretty much, how can I
say this, harmonious or did you find that there was
disagreement among the council on different
issues? Well, I suppose there was some
disagreement, but when I was on the council, it was
pretty well in agreement. We were talking just a
minute ago about the recreation program. Was this
a time when the city devoted more of its energy into
providing parks and things for the citizens?
The council has been pretty generally favorable
to the parks and that sort of thing. They really
have done most of the developing of the parks since
you were off of the council. In recent years,
they've done so much of the developing of the
parks. My daughter is on the council now. That's
right. Would you say, though, that Anderson...
He's the one that really... As far as I can
remember, he really spearheaded the whole thing
about the parks. He may have something different
to tell you on that, but that's the way I see it. If it
hadn't been for him, they might not have picked up
land where they did back then. And that was the
thing that he was working so hard at when the
Boyettes were making it hard for him. So he could
see the growth that College Station was? Yes. And
then, of course, being in the kind of work that he
was in, he knew the need for that sort of thing.
Do you remember the
Pinnell plan, a specific plan for growth of
College Station during your period on the
council? Wasn't that after you were on the
Pinnell? It was after. I believe this is one of the
first times they set down a specific plan for
College Station. What did they call it, the 2000?
The one now. Yeah. Yeah, that's the one now. I think
this was called 701, Plan 701.
That was after you were on the council. OK.
Zoning has always been important in College
Station. We had a zoning law since the city was
incorporated. And do you remember why did the
people want zoning? Well, they had people like Mr.
Gabbard on there that knew the necessary things.
Yeah, Mr. Gabbard and George Wilcox. It was a
college-oriented group, and they had more vision
than the ordinary person would have, things like
that. And they had also seen... what had happened
to Brian about something. Why don't you think
Brian zoned? They never have. They weren't
far-sighted enough to see ahead of time. And then
you get into it, you know, and there's... Yeah,
there are always people that are... It's against
their interest because of certain real estate
developments and that sort of thing. So they...
Well, I guess you read the papers and followed
their reasoning and so on. But Bryan had more of the
real estate developer people in their town,
whereas College Station... Not now. I think now we
have about as many out here. But back then,
really, Bryan was run by a few families almost, it
seems like. You know, the old families. And they
saw things one way and that was the way it was done.
Do you know of any of the names of the families?
I didn't know. So many of them are gone now, and
things have changed in Bryant since it's got in the
hands of more people now. More diversified type of
people than they used to have.
Everybody had to start out in Bryan. There wasn't
anything out here except on the campus when we came
here. And then some people had started a little
development around what is Dexter Park now, or
Bryson Park. And there were about 25 houses out
there, and that's all of us here. And the few houses
that were on the campus. Now the city has grown
clear out to be. What's the name of that? The Texas
Speedway? Well, not quite the Texas Speedway,
but... Yeah, it's almost out there. Yeah, it's
almost out there. The East Bypass. Yeah, see,
that's the only way we can go over to the south and
west. But you see, Brian looked at everybody
connected with the university as trenches. That
was the way to follow it.
or anything like this. And one neighbor next door
to me, who was very nice, she said, you know, they
just think that way about the university people.
Of course, it was college then. And she said, so she
said, they can't be bothered with you. And that's
the attitude they take. And so then they kind of
would screen them out as far as letting them give
any emphasis to anything that was going on in
there. Why would they think college professors
were transient since they usually stayed and
worked at a university? Yeah, well, of course,
some did just stay for a little while. But for some
reason or other, they had that attitude. And of
course, the housing was such a problem then. And
people weren't building their own homes in there
then. They were in red houses. And the housing
situation was terrible when they came here. The
first house we lived in out here, it's hard to tell
the difference between the atmosphere in the
house and outside the house. There just weren't
any homes around the campus, right? No. Those were
on the campus, owned by the state, and those were
given preference.
some heads and all heads didn't even get out of
there, and deans and people like that. The Gabbers
lived on the campus, the folks next door, and she
was just saying the other day, she said, you know,
that was such an undemocratic way of doing it. She
said, here were the people that were on the lowest
salaries having to struggle Of course, the rents
were low everywhere then because salaries were
low, like $30 a month and so forth. And that's all
they were worth. And that's all they were worth.
But she said, on the campus, she said she always
understood that the deans didn't have to pay
anything for their houses. And she said, we paid
$21 for our house. And they were given months of
privileges And two, the ones that were ranked a
little higher up. That's interesting. It is,
isn't it? So it was a good idea when they decided to
get those off. You know, as things developed, it
was just a very undemocratic way of doing it. Do you
remember while you were on the council any big
problems that the council had to deal with?
I don't think we had any problems. The
college station has them all now. Is that right?
Well, it's developed so fast. 40,000 to 50,000
people in the college station now. And
apparently, from other than just around this
area, they are recognized as having done a very
good job. of handling this fast growth. Patsy said
they didn't realize it until they got at some of
these meetings. And they've been held up as kind of
an example. That's wonderful. Handling rapid
growth. But when Mr. Bonham was on the council, it
was not growing as rapidly then? Oh, no. The thing
that made it grow rapidly is one of the things, I
should say, is when they brought the girls in here.
No, that just made all the difference in the world.
Everything developed. Isn't that funny? Every
way. Eating places. Yeah. It's like someone was
saying to me on the phone the other day. She said,
you know, back before the last ten years or so, why,
she said, if you had company, she said, you had to
feed them at home. There was no taking them out. We
didn't have it. in any of these places. Ten years?
Well, maybe it's longer than that. Not much. Not
much. Well, it's been longer than that. Ten years.
Just amazing. Oh, it is. Every time you leave
College Station and come back, you know, leave for
six months or so and come back, it's all different.
Yeah. Well, do you remember any great achievement
or?
We didn't think of them as that. No, we didn't
think. Just take care of the regular things,
regular business. And we didn't. And I remember we
didn't have as much of the opposition of minor
groups. No, that's true. The bigger this place
gets, the more of that sort of thing. get people in
here from all over. And this has been one of the
biggest problems of late years is people have come
in here from cities that have been in existence for
100 years or more. And they can't understand why we
don't have sidewalks everywhere and why we don't
have this and don't have that in what's an
organized city that's been there for 100 years.
They can't seem to understand it. And so they kind
of make little problems for them. Can you tell me
about the character of the town in the early days?
What people did for entertainment or recreation?
Card parties. Yes, we had lots of parties. Big card
parties. And big parties. And big parties.
Afternoon, evening, both. I think those things
changed with the war and with the place growing and
other things that you could go to. But that pretty
much made our own entertainment. I can remember
the first card party we went to. I think it was at
Leland's, wasn't it? Yeah, probably so. But there
were
nice groups here. Such congenial people, it
seems. And everybody was interested in everybody
else. You know, that was the only, really the
only...
recreation they had. It really was. Get together
in parties, play cards, and have a good time. The
people that you had the parties with still are in
contact with, but on the whole, I guess the
other... Most of them are dead. Oh, are they?
There's so many of them, man. But
would you say that the type of congeniality is not
as prominent today? It is as prominent, but they
have so many interests other than that. I see.
There's so many things they can do. We have opus and
all these things. They did have, for a good many
years, they had what they called, was that town
hall they called it then? and that that was always
very nice they brought in you know entertainers
and nearly everybody went to those and something
like that but that was just kind of a seasonal thing
but we uh and and we did so much of our shopping in
houston oh really do you what could you say is uh an
advantage of having the town that is influenced by
college professors or college people? Well,
I think the first thing is that you have a higher
class of people to run the city.
Well, and it makes such a difference in your
school. We had realized that over the years, and
that's what all these people, and they were across
the street, had children in school, or wanted that
in school. And so many of them like that will tell
you that they had older children. Schools were
different then than now. They didn't have all
these drugs, you know, that sort of thing. And when
our children were in high school, the whole school
was just back here, under the back of us. And there
were about 150 in high school. Well, you know, it
was just one big family almost. And everybody knew
everybody else. And if your children went out with
someone, you knew who they were with. Now, they
come in from everywhere, you see. And they tell me
that it's quite different. They've been exposed
to so many different things. A lot of people, as the
city did develop earlier, There were people,
traveling men, who covered a large area. Even when
our children were in school, we began to get a few of
those families moved in here because they saw what
a nice community it was. And they decided that they
could live anywhere in their area. And so they,
just one family, I'm thinking of the girls in
David's class, he said, he
I
believe this tape is going to run out let me check it